[Docs] Document CI System (#14656)
hail-is/hail: dev-docs/services/ci/README.md

# The CI Service in Hail Batch

Hail Batch includes a CI service which has three jobs:

- Runs tests against pull requests
- Merges PRs to the `main` branch
- Deploys services to the live infrastructure

It does all of these things only if certain conditions are met.

## Deployment

The CI service itself is deployed as a Kubernetes service in the Hail Batch cluster. See 
[architecture diagram](../Hail%20Batch%20Architectural%20Diagram.png).

As part of its configuration, CI must be configured with an access token allowing it to operate on 
behalf of a github account called hail-ci-robot.

To make CI work it needs to receive update triggers from the github repository. These are
configured within the github repository itself.

## Running tests against pull requests

The CI service is constantly monitoring for new PRs in the `hail` repository. 

When a new PR is opened, or an existing PR changes, hooks are triggered which alert the CI service. 
The CI service will then:

> - Check for validity

Reviewer: Maybe `authorize` might be better than validity
- known developers (ie those in `ci/ci/constants.py`) are authorized automatically
- otherwise PRs may be authorized by developers on a per-SHA basis

Author: Reworded

  - The author must be a known developer (or else a commit SHA can be individually approved via the CI service UI)

>   - The PR must be against the `main` branch

Reviewer: This is true by configuration. `HAIL_WATCHED_BRANCHES` variable in `ci/deployment.yaml` controls this. We could add more than just `main` to this watchlist.

I'm agreeing with what you're saying, just perhaps being pedantic which might be useful if anyone wants to see where this is configured.

Author: I think this extra context is super helpful. IMO it's worth including both "how we have it set up" and "what can be configured"

Author: This also makes it sound like CI is more poll-based than trigger-based? I don't have enough permissions in the repo to check what hooks we have set up so some of this is speculative (I should probably have done / go ahead and do a better job of highlighting guesswork)

Author: In fact, the advice from Daniel that "deleting CI's most recent deploy run will make it run again" seems like it _must_ be polling based. I'll look into this today

Author: It's a bit of both. Updated the doc with that info

- Run tests

>   - The CI service will run tests against the PR

Reviewer: Might be useful to document that it squashes and rebases the PR on top of `main` and then runs tests. I've experienced strange linting/formatting failures because I've generally used merge commits rather than rebasing.

Author: 👍 I'll add this under the details of what the test batch does below.

  - The CI service will report the results of the tests back to GitHub

### Running Tests

The process of running tests goes like:

> - CI will generate a new batch and submit it against the production Hail Batch service using its own service credentials

Reviewer: The tasks are defined in `build.yaml` in the top repo directory. It generates jobs in the batch from the steps defined therein.

- The batch contains jobs which will:
  - Clone the appropriate branch and build a new set of docker images for the updated services.
  - Deploy the batch suite of k8s services into one of many CI-owned namespaces in the Hail Batch cluster

>     - These namespaces are called 

Reviewer: Pray tell, what are they called Chris?

Author: Gotta leave a couple of cliffhangers in here for the next season

>   - Run a series of tests against the services

Reviewer: It also stands up a private instance of the batch services and tests against those!

Reviewer: Oh i see you mentioned that below. nice.

  - Each test:
    - Submits a specially crafted batch to the newly deployed batch namespace
    - Checks that the results of running the batch are what we would expect
- The CI service polls the batch which it submits for overall success or failure.
- Once the batch has either succeeded or failed, CI uses that result to report status back to GitHub

Examples of CI test runs can be seen by searching through the production batch log, as long as you have developer

> permissions. For example: `/batches?q=user+%3D+ci%0D%0Atest+%3D+1`

Reviewer: You need to be a member of the `ci` billing project i believe.

#### CI Testing Timeline

The image below shows the CI testing timeline:

![CI Testing Timeline](ci-test.png)

## Merging PRs to the `main` branch

When a PR's status changes, it will trigger a hook which alerts the CI service. The CI service will 
determine whether the PR is ready to be merged. If it is, the CI service will merge the pull request.

Readiness is determined by github status checks. The following conditions must be met:

- The PR must be against the `main` branch

> - The PR must have passed all tests (and there must be none outstanding)

Reviewer: in gcp. note that the ci tests on azure are not required to merge the pr

Author: Is this true? I could have sworn I'd seen PRs with GCP CI green and Azure CI yellow still not merged. As with the comment above... this makes me think I should check whether CI is trigger-based or polling-based

Reviewer: It's true as far as github is concerned. I haven't looked too closely about what ci does with respect to its counterpart in foreign clouds

- The PR must have sufficient approvals

## Deploying services to the live infrastructure

When a PR is merged into the `main` branch, the CI service will:

- Check for validity
  - The author must be a known developer

>   - The PR must be against the `main` branch

Reviewer: Is this a copypasta or does ci actually do this? I thought it deployed new commits on main irrespective of the commit author?

- Create a new batch job to:
  - Build various components and service images
  - Deploy to a test namespace
  - Run tests against the services
  - Deploy to the `default` (ie prod) namespace
  - A handful of final actions
    - eg rolling out artifact registry cleanup policies, amongst many other things

Note: It's not actually quite as waterfall-y as this. In fact the jobs are all running in a hail
batch, and each service being deploy has its own path through the DAG. So it's quite possible that the services are 
test/deploy-ing in parallel, and that the deploy for one service might happen before the test for another has even begun.

> This should all be fine, because it was previously tested as part of the PR approval process.

Reviewer 2: Do we really deploy anything before all test steps have succeeded? My mental model was that we ignore the tests run on the pr pre-merging, and treat it as untested post-merge, because the merge could have introduced semantic conflicts.

Author: This is a good question. This is an assumption based on - 
1. The batch lists the tasks in service-by-service order
2. The "deploy batch" job is listed before "test batch" jobs
3. There only seems to be one "deploy batch" job and it seems to target the `default` namespace

But I could easily have missed something. Worth double checking

Author: (Side-note: oh wow, some job groups would be a **_really!_** nice addition when trying to work this kind of thing out!)

Some selected examples from a [recent](https://batch.hail.is/batches/8199317) deploy:
- Job 27: `batch_image` [ran](https://batch.hail.is/batches/8199317/jobs/27) from 21:58 to 22:00
- Job 39: `test_hail_java_0` [ran](https://batch.hail.is/batches/8199317/jobs/39) from 22:12 to 22:17
- Job 44: `test_hail_python_0` [ran](https://batch.hail.is/batches/8199317/jobs/44) from 22:12 to 22:18
- Job 78: `test_hail_python_local_backend_0` [ran](https://batch.hail.is/batches/8199317/jobs/78) from 22:15 to 22:21
- Job 153 `deploy_batch` [ran](https://batch.hail.is/batches/8199317/jobs/153) from 22:04 to 22:05
- Job 176: `test_batch_0` [ran](https://batch.hail.is/batches/8199317/jobs/176) from 22:15 to 22:23
- Job 182: `deploy_ci` [ran](https://batch.hail.is/batches/8199317/jobs/182) from 22:05 to 22:05

Reviewer 2: Note that you can see the dependencies directly in [build.yaml](https://github.com/hail-is/hail/blob/main/build.yaml). I believe `deploy_batch` is what deploys the new batch service in the test namespace, as `test_batch` depends on it. I'm not sure which job actually deploys to production.

Reviewer 2: To close the loop here: `deploy_batch` does deploy to production (in the default namespace), which happens before tests are run. *But*, CI will only merge a PR if it has a successful CI run *on top of the current head of main*. That means the commit that will be merged and deployed is exactly the same (with the same git sha) as the commit that passed CI. There are still a few small holes for issues to slip past the tests, in particular because CI runs the batch tests in the test namespace in a fresh deployment, while the tests after deploying are run in the default namespace against the production system.

> # The CI Service in Hail Batch
> 
> Hail Batch includes a CI service which has three functional purposes:

Reviewer: This is boarderline pedantry, but I don't think of "Hail Batch" being anything other than the batch service and the python client library. the batch service + ci etc are generally referred to as the "Services".
```suggestion
# The CI Service

The CI service has three functional purposes:
```

- Runs tests against pull requests

> - Merges PRs to the `main` branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Merges PRs to the `main` branch when all checks have passed
```

- Deploys services to the live infrastructure

## Structure and Operation

The CI service itself is deployed as a Kubernetes service in the Hail Batch cluster. See 
[architecture diagram](../Hail%20Batch%20Architectural%20Diagram.png).

> As part of its configuration, CI must be configured with an access token allowing it to operate on 
> behalf of a github account called hail-ci-robot.

Reviewer: repetition of "configure"
```suggestion
CI must be configured with an access token allowing it to operate on 
behalf of the 'hail-ci-robot' github account.
```

### CI Update Loop

The core CI update loop operates over a set of "watched branches" which each track three types of state flag which can 
be marked as dirty:
- The state of github ("`github_changed`")
- The state of the deployed system ("`batch_changed`")
- The state of the watched branch itself (for example - its current commit) ("`state_changed`")

> In hail-is, there is exactly one watched branch, which is `hail-is/hail:main`.

Reviewer: I think it would make more sense to describe the deployment model before mentioning the organisation. Reading this, i was like "what does hail-is have to do with this". Alternatively, say something along the lines of "the default-namespace deployment of ci currently tracks `hail-is/hail:main`".

Reviewer: FWIW, I don't particularly like documenting the current values of config variables as these go stale quickly. I'd link to the file where interested readers can find current values.

Author: Hmm, I can move it and reword it. I want to strike a balance between "documenting something very general purpose" and "explaining how it is being used". I'll try again

Reviewer 2: I agree. This document will be useful for understanding how our CI deployment works on `hail-is/hail::main`. I think whether some behavior is hard-coded or controlled by configuration is of secondary importance. If some config variable changes frequently, then agreed we should avoid talking about its current setting, but I don't think that's the case here.

At a configurable frequency, the CI service will mark every flag for each of its watched branches as dirty, which
will trigger a re-evaluation of the system state.

In hail-is, this polling happens every 5 minutes.

### Github Configuration

> To make CI more responsive it can be configured to receive webhook event triggers from the github repository. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make CI more responsive it is configured to receive webhook event triggers from the github repository. 
```

Author: Again, this is an accident of trying to be both a general purpose doc ("can be") vs how we use it ("is")

- Authorization
  - If the author is in the [`ci/ci/constants`](../../../ci/ci/constants.py) list of known developers, it can be tested.
  - If the github SHA for the commit has been registered, it can be tested.
  - Otherwise, it will be ignored.
- Check for validity
  - The PR must be against a watched branch, or else it wouldn't be considered.
  - If the current commit has already had tests run against it, no further action is taken
  - If the PR is marked with the "do_not_test" label, no further action is taken
- Run tests
  - The CI service will run tests against the PR (see below) 
  - Report results back to Github using the Checks interface

### Running Tests

The process of running tests goes like:

- CI will create a pending Check against the PR in question
- CI will generate a new batch and submit it against the production Hail Batch service using its own service credentials
  - Tasks in the batch are defined in `build.yaml` in the top repo directory. CI generates jobs in the batch from the steps defined in there.
- The batch contains jobs which will:
  - Clone the appropriate branch

>   - Squash and rebase against `main`

Reviewer: more pedantry
```suggestion
  - Squash and rebase onto `main`
```

>   - Build a new set of docker images for the updated services.

Reviewer: It also builds and tests images for hail query

    participant CIVM as CI VMs
    end

    Github->>CI: Notify PR created/updated

    CI->>Github: Register github check (pending)
    CI->>PB: Submit CI test batch
    activate PB
    PB->>PVM: Submit build jobs
    activate PVM
    PVM-->>PB: Done
    deactivate PVM
    PB->>PVM: Submit deploy jobs
    activate PVM
    PVM->>CIB: Deploy batch service
    activate CIB
    PVM-->>PB: Done
    deactivate PVM
    PB->>PVM: Submit test jobs
    activate PVM
    PVM->>CIB: Submit test batches
    CIB->>CIVM: Submit test batch jobs
    activate CIVM
    CIVM-->>CIB: Validate results
    deactivate CIVM
    PVM-->>PB: Done
    deactivate PVM
    PB->>PVM: Submit cleanup jobs
    activate PVM
    PVM->>CIB: Clean up service
    deactivate CIB
    PVM-->>PB: Done
    deactivate PVM
    PB-->>CI: Detects completion
    CI->>Github: Update github check
```

## Merging PRs to the `main` branch

When a PR state changes, it will cause the `github_changed` flag to become dirty. 

During its update loop, the CI service will determine whether any PRs targeting its watched branches are elibible to
be merged.

Readiness is determined by github status checks. The following conditions must be met:

> - The PR must be against the `main` branch

Reviewer 2: Is it `main`, or any watched branch? Just since you started out making the distinction carefully, we should maintain it throughout.

Author: Any watched branch, but this is automatically true or else we wouldn't be considering the PR for mergability in the first place... so I'll remove this line

> - The PR must have passed all tests in GCP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The PR must have passed all required checks
```

- The PR must be approved

The control flow from final approval to CI merging a PRs looks like:

- The PR's state will change in github (either a check changes to SUCCESS, or a review is approved)

> - The github webhook callback will cause the `github_changed` flag will be marked as dirty for the `WatchedBranch`

Reviewer 2: The watched branch which is the target of the PR?

- The `WatchedBranch`'s `_update` method in [`github.py`](../../../ci/ci/github.py) scans all PRs against the branch and updates state that helps determine mergeability.

> - The `WatchedBranch`'s `_update` method in [`github.py`](../../../ci/ci/github.py) iterates again to merge all mergeable PRs, in priority order

Reviewer 2: There's a subtlety here which is being glossed over. As I understand (without having inspected the code, so correct me if I'm wrong), we keep a PR's check set to SUCCESS even if the successful CI run was on top of an outdated main (i.e. another PR has merged since this PR was last tested). Rerunning the tests of all PRs every time any PR merges would be wasteful, but we don't want to merge a PR unles it has a successful CI run on top of the current main. My mental model is that CI chooses one PR to be the next merge candidate, and reruns the tests if the last run is out of date, then merges only if that suceeds. But I don't know for sure if that's right.

Author: Hmm, interesting. I didn't see evidence for this in the code but it seems logical. 

I also wonder whether this is why we sometimes see PRs get "stuck" with pending checks. Perhaps CI is just choosing to delay re-running until the PR is back on top of its mergeable list 🤔

Author: I did a deep dive into this today, and you are indeed correct. I've added a flowchart showing the full set of paths through the update loop, which might be overkill in the end, but was a useful exercise for me in the process of making it.

What we seem to do is - 

- During `heal`:
  - Nominate a current merge candidate
    - If its tests are out of date, re-run them
- During `try_to_merge`:
  - Iterate over all PRs
    - Test is_mergeable 
    - Merge if mergeable (and return after the first success)

So... I think it's _possible_ that we might kick off a "merge candidate" test and then decide to merge some other PR while those tests are running (if its tests were already up to date)

## Deploying services to the live infrastructure

When a PR is merged into the `main` branch, a webhook will trigger. The CI service will set its `github_changed` flag.

During its update loop, the CI service will determine that the SHA of the `WatchedBranch` has changed and trigger
a deployment.

> - Create a new batch job to:

Reviewer 2: I believe this is also `build.yaml`, just with a configuration variable set to make it deploy?

  - Build various components and service images
  - Run various pre-deployment tests
  - Deploy to the `default` (ie prod) namespace
  - Run various post-deployment tests
  - A handful of final actions
    - eg rolling out artifact registry cleanup policies, amongst many other things

Note: It's not actually quite as waterfall-y as this. In fact the jobs are all running in a hail
batch, and each package being built and service being deployed has its own path through the DAG. So it's quite possible
that services are deploy/test-ing in parallel, and that the deploy for one service might happen before the test for
another has completed.

> This should all be fine, because everything was previously tested as part of the PR approval process.

Reviewer 2: Should emphasize here that a PR is only merged (really, squashed and rebased) if the exact commit that is added to main, with the exact same SHA, has passed CI.

    participant PB as PROD Batch (default namespace)
    end
    box GCE (PROD VMs)
    participant PVM as  PROD VMs
    end

    Github->>CI: Notify 'main' branch updated
    CI->>PB: Submit CI deploy batch
    activate PB
    PB->>PVM: Submit build jobs
    activate PVM
    PVM-->>PB: Done
    deactivate PVM
    PB->>PVM: Submit deploy jobs
    activate PVM
    PVM->>PB: Redeploy batch service
    PVM->>CI: Redeploy CI service
    PVM-->>PB: Done
    deactivate PVM
    PB->>PVM: Submit test jobs
    activate PVM
    PVM->>PB: Submit test batches
    PB->>PVM: Submit test batch jobs
    activate PVM
    PVM-->>PB: Validate results
    deactivate PVM
    PVM-->>PB: Done
    deactivate PVM
    PB-->>CI: Detects completion
```

## Issues

### Hanging PR state

It is sometimes possible for a PR status to be stuck in pending even though the test batch has completed
This can be fixed by pushing a new commit to the branch, but it's strange that regular polling does not catch
these instances.
 
## Open Questions

1. Sometimes in logs we see logs like `"update github br-hail-ci-test-ci-test-<RANDOM>-main"` for various random branch names. 

> What does this mean?

Reviewer 2: Could these branches be the results of squashing and rebasing a PR before running CI?

2. Do we really deploy first / test second? And do we really deploy Batch and CI using jobs that are already running in
Batch and CI? Do the services get shut down and reconnect to existing instances of the deploy jobs started by the 

> previous version?

Reviewer: Don't quite understand the question.
There's one deploy job at a time that deploys already tested artefacts (albeit, tested in a different namespace).
k8s handles updating the various pods with their new images.
Sometimes, the services are brought down depending on database migrations. I think that's defined in `build.yaml`.
